I am Yendiyev Magomed. I work at the Moscow State University in the Faculty of Economics.
I am a lecturer, or rather a lecturer, a candidate for Economic Sciences.
I teach financial markets and corporate finance. I deal with a lot of state finances.
I have about 200 publications, including about 10 textbooks and monographs.
I have worked on the order of the World Bank, the Ministry of Finance, and regional authorities.
I conduct my own research.
So, now a few words about what will be in the course.
We must consider several key points.
The most important of them, of course, is the assessment of investment projects,
how to make decisions.
In order to do this, we will have to go through several preparatory stages.
One of them is to get acquainted with the discounting procedure.
Another very important one is to choose a discount rate.
Another very important one is to learn how to assess the cost of financial assets.
After that, we will move on to the contents of our course.
We will consider how to make decisions on the basis of the Basic Rules,
and we will also consider how the new ideology of financial accounting affects the current financial operations of the authorities.
That is, the nuances.
We will finish here.
We must start with what you will need to learn to think in a new way.
This sounds loud, of course, but let's look at an example.
We are all used to the fact that any product costs as much as the labor is invested in it.
If there was a table here, we could say that this table costs as much as the labor is invested in it.
Next, this is the cost of raw materials, the cost of profitability.
These are the main positions.
How much does a financial asset cost?
A financial asset costs as much as it will bring benefits in the future.
If we assessed this table as it should be assessed,
we would not say how much labor is invested in it, but what benefits this table will bring in the future.
Here, look, in analogy with the financial asset we will talk about later,
it turns out that this table will serve you for 10 years.
The benefit of this table is that you sit at it, you dance on holidays.
These are the two main positions.
Can the first and second positions be assessed in money?
For example, you sit at this table for 10 years, and dance on it, for example, 100 times.
If we knew the cost of sitting at the table and the cost of our right to dance on the table,
we could calculate in the monetary dimension what benefit this table will bring us.
Accordingly, this would be its price, but not what is invested in it.
Today, we cannot measure the benefit brought by this table,
and therefore we traditionally assess it based on the labor invested in it, which is not true.
Maybe in the future this practice will change, but for now, the future has come for financial assets.
They are measured, they are assessed based not on how much money is invested in this plant,
how much its main funds cost, but on what this asset, share, bond, other securities,
investment project, how much it will bring in the future.
We should probably pay attention to the fact that there are a number of key moments in changing thinking.
I will name the most important of them.
The first is the purpose of the company, the purpose of the company's existence.
Traditionally, it was believed that this was a profit.
In fact, this is not the case.
In the new financial dimension, this is an increase in capital value,
or, to put it more clearly, an increase in the value of shares, an increase in capitalization.
Of course, there is a nuance between these statements, but in general, one can say that the purpose of the company is not profit,
but an increase in the value of the share.
Although, of course, profit is an important element, no one argues, but the value of the share becomes a more important element.
The next point is when a company has a profit in the new financial dimension.
Not when it has an increase in revenue over its value.
No, but when the company's income exceeds the average market value of resources.
Imagine you have capital, 100 rubles, you are trying to do something with it, you are investing.
At this moment, the average market value of money is 15%.
You need to earn 15% per year just to keep your capital at the same level.
If you earn 16%, you will get a profit of 1%.
If you increase your capital by 12%, you will not get a profit, you will get a loss of 3%.
Your capital should grow from year to year along with the value of money.
If this does not happen, you will incur a loss.
We talked about the purpose of the company, we talked about when profit is formed, when loss is formed.
The next point is about the value of the share.
We will only repeat the thesis I mentioned earlier.
The value of a financial asset is the sum of all future income from this asset, from this project.
Since we have a value of money factor, we must discount all these money flows.
Thus, the value of a financial asset is the value of all future money flows.
Depending on the situation, it can be either a dividend, or a dividend and amortization, or profit amortization.
The options are different depending on the situation.
And the last important point.
The increase in the value of the company can occur at the time of the announcement of the company plans.
This is a very interesting position.
It explains why profit ceases to be the main criterion for the growth of the company.
With the transition to a new criterion, that is, the increase in the value of the share or capital,
with the transition to this new criterion, new opportunities for expanding the business are opened.
For example, the merger and absorption deals.
For example, the management of the capital structure.
For example, relationships with investors.
For example, the regulation of the work of the board of directors.
All this allows the management of the company to manage its finances not only through the main production, but also through other factors.
At this stage, the announcement of the plans can indicate that the company has a future development prospect.
These prospects can already be evaluated today, converted into monetary expressions and added to the price of shares.
This is an approximate mechanism for changing the price after the announcement of the news.
So, we have considered five main points related to the change in thinking.
At this point, we will continue to build a mathematical apparatus.
And then we will move on to the rules of analysis.
Now the second section.
Here we will consider three main points.
The discount rate, what it is, the effective interest rate, what it is, how it works.
And in more detail, we will analyze the topic of the valuation of the financial asset.
And the financial asset, I repeat, is not only a securities, but also an investment project.
So, let's turn to the slide on which you can see the discount rate.
The logic here is very simple.
Imagine that you have 100 rubles today, and in a year you will get them back together with interest.
100 rubles today and 100 rubles in a year have different values, otherwise no one would pay interest.
Do you agree?
There is a connection between two events, between two monetary amounts, today and the future.
The discount rate, which is designated under formula number 1, allows us to find a relationship between the future and the current amounts of money.
Let's remember a couple of definitions.
Future value and present value.
The fact is that the ideology of discounting was born in the West, and the main terms came to us from there.
We will use foreign words such as future value, present value, in order to correspond to the general spirit of world science.
Russian equivalents of these words are less popular and less in demand.
Although we will use Russian versions as well.
For example, present value is the current or given value of money, and future value is the future value of money.
If we do not take into account the factor of complex percentages, which I think you should know, I have no doubt that you know,
in this case, formula number 2 shows us the relationship between the future amount of money and the current amount of money.
We use the number of years formula and the annual interest rate.
And we move on to a more interesting point.
If the discounting coefficient was a brick, a basic brick of the construction of the entire discounting system,
now we have to consider a small wall.
This wall is called the effective interest rate.
Where did it come from?
Consumer loans are very common today in Russia and abroad, of course.
If you came in and were interested in the terms, you probably noticed that we are talking about paying interest every month.
If you have an annual interest rate, for example, 12% per year, and you are offered to pay 1% per month on a loan.
1% multiplied by 12 is 12% per year.
It seems to be all right. No, it's not right.
Because 1% per month is more than 12% per year.
In order to determine the real cost, the real rate of interest rate when we pay more than once a year, we use the number 4 formula.
Effective interest rate.
I will repeat again. If on the condition of a loan, some kind of deal, you pay interest not once a year, but more often,
then in this case you must recalculate the rate you have been declared, which will be nominal, in fact, into the effective rate.
At the same time, M, I draw your attention to, is the number of periods of interest per year.
If we have quarterly interest rate, then M is equal to 4, if monthly, then 12.
M multiplied by N is the total number of periods of interest.
The formula is not difficult.
Try to calculate it. Go to the nearest bank, find out their conditions, and then calculate. It will be interesting.
I draw your attention to the fact that the order of work with interest rates has its own peculiarities.
For example, here is a mini-task. You have an income for each of the four quarters. How to find the total income per year?
This is very close to what we just discussed. Effective rate, but on the contrary.
We know the income for each of the four quarters. How to calculate the total annual income?
Here are two options. The first option is to add up all the income per quarter and divide it by 4.
A beautiful option, but not the right one.
The more correct option is to do as written in formula number 5.
This approach allows you to find the annual interest rate in this case.
In addition, the interest rate can be either announced in advance, for example, to the banks when they issue a loan,
or you can calculate the profitability of the financial instrument in other ways.
For example, the stock was worth 100 rubles when you bought it. You sold it when it was worth 120 rubles.
If we subtract 100 from 120 and divide it by 100, we get what is called the profitability of the financial instrument.
In this case, the profitability is 20%.
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that we said 20%, but when we apply the formula,
we substitute the formula for the share, not the percentage.
We said 20%, but we substitute the formula for 0.2.
8% is 0.08.
For your convenience, here is a couple of formulas, 6 and 8.
Formula number 6.
Please note that it is proposed to calculate the profitability based on the parameters of the financial instrument.
The next formula is very interesting.
It shows you the profitability for the current year of the financial instrument.
You need to take the income you get from the share, the bond, the project for one year
and compare it with the current price of the asset.
Then you will get the profitability for the year.
This is an interesting formula because it will be repeated in different variations.
Here is an example.
Imagine that you get 30 rubles per share for a year.
The value of the share you bought was 100 rubles.
Therefore, your current profitability is 30%.
It's not difficult.
The next formula is more difficult, but not deadly.
It is the calculation of complex percentages.
We omit the mathematical justification so as not to make our course too complicated.
Let's move on to the formula.
Please note that this formula shows the relationship between the future value of money and the current value of money
taking into account the complex percentages.
Complex percentages mean that you have to refinance the funds you have.
This means that you cannot keep the money just on the account.
The money must be in investments and bring some income all the time.
This is the logic of constant reinvestment.
It is applied to everyone who works in the financial markets.
Otherwise, if you live in simple percentages, you will incur financial losses.
This formula is very simple.
If we have two periods, then we will have a slightly different example.
The formula is not difficult.
The next topic is the assessment of the value of a financial asset.
This topic is very important because it will be the basis for learning how to apply investment decisions in new financial conditions.
We will consider three financial instruments.
The credit resource, bonds, and shares.
The assessment of the value of each of them has the same logic.
It is a set of cash payments, each of which is discounted.
We start with the credit resource and determine the conditions.
What do we understand in this case under the credit resource?
You are in debt.
You are charged a percentage every time.
But you do not pay it.
You are charged a percentage and you do not pay it.
You pay.
Let's clarify.
You are charged a percentage.
You do not pay it.
The end of the loan period comes.
At this moment, you pay the main amount of the loan and all the remaining interest.
These are the conditions.
In order to determine the current value of the money according to this condition,
based on all the future payments we know,
we use the formula presented on the slide.
Please note that the present value and the future value are connected.
This connection between them is very similar to the discount rate.
If you stop now and return to the beginning of our course to see what the discount rate is,
you will see a direct connection.
This brick is located between these two parameters.
Future value and present value.
The second formula is indicated nearby, which has a little more parameters.
This is to take into account the multiplicity of the percentage calculation throughout the year.
The first option is for the case when you calculate the percentage only once a year.
There may be many years, 2, 3, 10, but they are calculated once a year.
The second option is the same formula for the case when the percentage is calculated quarterly,
monthly or in some other period, once every six months, for example.
Next.
Estimating the value of the bonds.
We will now consider the case of discounting the cash flows,
when you take a loan,
you pay the interest every month,
then the end of the loan period comes,
you pay the last interest and return the main amount of the loan.
This is the scheme of cash flow bonds.
Although in some cases it may be suitable for loans.
But we are talking about bonds now.
So, you took a loan,
pay interest every quarter or every month or another period,
and finally, you pay the last payment on the bond,
the last coupon and pay the main amount of the loan.
To make it easier to understand,
pay attention to the slide,
to the formula associated with annuity.
Annuity is the flow of equal amounts of money
arising over equal periods of time.
For example, annuity is when you,
or you pay 50 rubles per quarter.
You pay 50 rubles, this is annuity.
Another example.
For example, you are a student,
and you receive a stipend of 3000 rubles every month.
This is annuity.
You are paid the same amount of money every month
over equal periods of time.
The next formula shows us how easy it is,
avoiding this long formula number 12,
how easy it is to calculate the cost of annuity.
Again, we are not talking about simply adding up
all these 3000 rubles you are paid as a student
in the form of a stipend
and getting some amount as a result.
For example, in 10 months, it will be 30,000 rubles.
No, we must discount every 3000 rubles,
but all at different periods of time.
In this case, you will find out the current cost
of all your future payments.
By the way, if you want to sell your right to receive a stipend,
you will also need to discount these money flows
and get their value.
In any case, try to calculate for the sake of interest.
You can stop the course and calculate how much you cost.
To do this, sign up for the future,
as far as you know,
as far as you know for the future,
sign up for all your income.
It can be a salary, a stipend, or something else.
Then discount each of these payments
by today.
Add up and you will find out how much you cost
from a financial point of view.
The cost of a person in this case
means his ability to generate financial flows.
Let's go back to our formula.
Formula 13 allows you to calculate the cost
of an annuity in a very convenient formula.
S is monthly, quarterly, or annual payment.
K is the capitalization coefficient.
It is the opposite of the discounting coefficient.
So, we now have two coefficients,
capitalization and discounting.
The discounting coefficient reduces,
for example, the amount of the future
to the present value.
The amount of the future is reduced.
The capitalization coefficient, on the contrary,
increases the amount of the present
to the future.
So, the formulas are quite simple.
It's simple math.
We omit the basis.
Now, if we add up the cost of annuity
to the cost of the principal amount of the loan
which is paid at the end of the term,
we get the cost of the obligation.
Look at the next slide.
You will see a rather large formula.
It means the following.
We have two coefficients.
The first coefficient is the discounted amount
of all our coupon payments.
This first coefficient can be replaced
by the previous formula,
the cost of annuity.
But if your payment for a coupon is different,
of different sizes,
then it is better to use this formula
in which each coupon is counted and discounted separately.
The second coefficient is the discounted amount.
Please note that the discounting coefficient
is present here in the open form.
Now, let's talk about the valuation of the share price.
Nothing changes with a flat account.
It's the same money flows,
but in this case, it's not a coupon,
as it was in the case of the obligation,
but a dividend.
These are the regular dividends
that we will receive in the future.
Each of these dividends is discounted,
that is, it is brought to the present day,
and then they all add up.
This is the value of the share.
Pay attention to the slide.
Here, the current price of the share
in the future period is highlighted in dark color.
The logic behind the construction of this formula is as follows.
Imagine that you know the value of the share
in a period, for example, a year.
In this case, it is PV1.
Then the current price of the share,
which we want to calculate,
will be the discounted dividend
plus the discounted value of the share
at the end of the next year.
If we do not know the value of the share
at the end of the first year,
but we know the value of the share
at the end of the second year,
you can look at the second line of calculations.
Here is what our formula will look like.
We discount the DDIV1 dividend.
We then discount the dividend of the second year
by two years,
and the price of the share at the end of the second year.
But we still do not know the price of the share
at the end of the second year.
Therefore, we take this process of determining this price
for another year.
Now it turns out that our current price of the share
is equal to the discounted dividend of the first year,
the discounted dividend of the second year,
note that the second degree is already there,
and the discounted dividend and the price at the end of the third year,
note that the discount is in the third degree.
Thus, by postponing the moment of determining the price of the share
in the future, we come to a very interesting conclusion,
to a very interesting result.
It turns out that there comes a moment
when this PV in the future, for example,
PV of the 60th year or PV of the 100th year,
it becomes unusually small,
so small that it can be neglected.
Thus, we return to what we started with.
The cost of the asset is equal to the discounted cost
of all payments on it, in this case dividends.
Mathematically, it is easier to write all this down,
but for this we will have to make assumptions.
We must assume something about the dividend.
For example, we can assume that the dividend is constant,
or that it is growing at the same pace all the time,
or something else.
These first two points are the most common.
So, if the dividend is constant,
then pay attention to the slide,
we will get a formula that we have already met.
This is the formula of the current cost,
sorry, this is the formula of the current profitability.
You saw it, you can scroll back and look at it,
it is presented there in a different form.
Here, the meaning of this formula is that
by comparing the dividend and the current market value of money,
you get the value of the asset.
So, if you get 20 rubles every year,
in the infinite future,
for many, many years in a row,
the cost of money today is 10%,
then what is the cost of this asset?
In other words, what is the cost of the securities
that you become the owner of every year for 20 rubles?
Unlimited amount of time.
Let's count.
20 must be divided by, not by 10%,
we will repeat that in these formulas,
we say percentages, but in formulas we use fractions.
So we must divide 20 by 0.1.
We get 200.
Consequently, the cost of the money flow,
unlimited amount of time,
20 units of the annual income,
at the market value of money 10%,
is equal to 200 units.
For this amount, you can safely buy this asset.
The next formula is for the case
when the dividend is growing at a constant rate.
We omit the mathematical justification,
noting that PV0 is the asset value today,
is equal to the dividend of the next period,
divided by the specified difference,
where G is the rate of dividend growth.
I would like to ask you a question.
I will use the case.
Well, no questions are allowed,
we have a course.
What do you think about the offer
to get an unlimited dividend,
just a very large dividend,
but in 100 years?
Let's do it this way, 3 seconds.
Are you for or against?
Do you like it or not?
So, 1, 2, 3.
You made a decision.
Now the right answer.
This offer should be rejected.
And not only because 100 years is more than a lifetime.
No matter how large the dividend is,
being discounted for 100 periods,
its price today will be miserable.
Therefore, I propose you a very large dividend in the future.
I will not lie to you,
but this is wrong.
Great.
And now another question.
We said that the dividend can be constant,
it can grow at a constant rate,
it can fall at a constant rate.
And another situation when the dividend is zero.
Please answer the question,
why some of the Russian dividends
that do not pay dividends
have a market price,
have a market rating.
According to the logic of things,
if this stock does not have a dividend,
there is nothing to discount,
and the current value should be equal to zero.
So, we count to three.
Your suggestions.
Count them for yourself.
One, two, three.
The main answer,
related to this situation,
when the dividend is zero,
is as follows.
The market is guided by the fact
that in the future the company will start paying dividends.
This is one.
The second.
The company has a residual value,
which can be distributed between shareholders
in the event of its implementation.
These are the two main points
that do not allow the price of the asset to fall to zero.
Let's continue.
Now, after we have figured out
how to evaluate financial assets,
we move on to the next topic.
Now we need to figure out
how we will evaluate the value of a financial asset.
I repeat,
all our decisions related to the assessment of the investment project
will be based, one way or another,
on the analysis of cash flows
and on the analysis of the value of the investment project.
Therefore, we need to analyze
two key points
that are applicable to the investment project.
The first key point
is related to the determination of the discount rate
for the investment project.
The second key point
is related to the calculation
and determination of cash flows,
that is,
what is the analogue of a coupon
or a dividend for an investment project.
First, let's say a few words about investment decisions.
What is it?
We have already talked about it for almost a quarter of the course.
What are investment decisions?
We did not mention it.
We do.
Investment decisions are decisions
made based on the analysis
of incoming and outgoing discounted cash flows.
These can be decisions related to
whether to accept or not accept an investment project for financing,
suspend or even stop an investment project.
In some cases,
stopping the project can be beneficial.
Oddly enough.
Choose or review the sources of financing.
There may be other options.
The most important thing,
including the one related to the merger and absorption deals,
is to accept or not accept an investment project.
So,
let's deal with the calculation
and determination of the cash flows.
In the simplest case,
you can use
the data of the profit and loss report,
for example,
to sum up the profit after tax and amortization.
This is a simple way to determine the cash flow.
But it is very incorrect.
There are options related to this approach.
For example,
you can calculate the profit before tax
and add amortization to it.
You can calculate the profit before tax
But this does not remove the key claim to this method.
The cash flow is not reflected there.
We are not interested in accounting estimates of finances and cash flows.
We are interested in the cash flow.
Therefore,
the cash flow should correspond to the difference
between the balance sheets at the beginning and end of the year.
To get to this amount,
the so-called indirect method of calculation is used.
We will need to sum up the cash flows
in three main directions
that each company has in its operation.
These are the cash flows from the main activity,
the cash flows from the investment activity,
and the cash flows from the financial activity.
You can see them on this slide.
Now, let's take a look at each of the cash flows.
The first is the cash flow from the main activity.
We are interested in,
I repeat,
the cash flow.
To calculate this,
we take the profit as a basis for the account after the tax.
We must correct this profit.
We must restore the amortization in it.
Next, we must correct,
in other words, restore the non-realized profit or loss,
as well as correct the balance sheet.
For example,
if we have increased the commodity-material reserves
over the year,
we had commodity-material reserves,
for example, at 100 units,
and now we have commodity-material reserves at 120 units.
This is the inflow of money or outflow.
I repeat,
commodity-material reserves have changed.
From 100 to 120.
Your answer?
In fact, this means the outflow of money.
I hope our answers are correct.
Why outflow?
Because 20 units of growth required the withdrawal of money.
That is, the money you had
was directed to increase the commodity-material reserves.
This means the outflow of money from your disposal.
For example,
such an article of balance as the account for payment.
For example, the account for payment has increased.
What does this mean?
You had an account for payment,
that is, what you have to pay.
You had an account for payment of 50,
and you have an account for payment of 70.
This means that you owe someone 20 units more.
In theory, you should have given this 20 units to someone,
but you did not.
This means the outflow of money to you.
This money should have left you.
You did not allow this.
Because of this, you left this money with you.
This means the outflow of money.
Based on this logic, you calculate the balance sheet.
As for non-realizable profits or losses,
I would like to draw your attention to the fact that if you have a profit,
you take this number with a minus sign when you correct it.
Because this profit is already taken into account
in the total amount of the profit of the company
that we took as a base.
I will repeat myself again.
To calculate the money flows from the main activity,
you take the profit after the tax payment
and start to correct it.
You add amortization to it, which you withdrew from it earlier.
Then you add or subtract profit or loss.
If you had a non-realizable profit, you subtract it.
Because before that, this profit was taken into account.
If there was a loss, then you add it.
Then you correct it on the balance sheet.
The next one is the flow of money from investment activities.
The word itself, investment activity,
explains the meaning of the operations carried out.
In fact, there are two key positions.
The first is the purchase or sale of securities for the purpose of investment.
Or the purchase or sale of the main assets.
This is also an investment.
So, by and large, you will have only two articles.
Purchase of main assets, purchase of securities.
Sale of main assets, sale of securities.
Please note that you do not reflect dividends here.
Here only the general movement of resources is reflected.
The next one is the third component of the money flows.
The flow of money from financial activities.
Under the word financial activity,
the attraction of companies and resources to their goals is understood.
That is, the issuance of securities,
the issuance of shares,
the cancellation of shares,
the issuance of bonds,
the cancellation of bonds.
What else can there be?
The payment of dividends also applies to financial activity.
This is also quite simple compared to operational activity,
compared to the main activity.
This is a simple operation.
In the next slide, you can see an abstract example of a company
that has certain amounts of all three types of activity.
Please note.
This can be a current year,
this can be a forecast for some of the future years,
this can be a report for some past year.
So, this company has a positive inflow of money from the main activity,
of 250 units.
From investment activity, from the flow of resources,
from financial activity, there is an inflow.
How can we characterize this situation?
Is this company stable?
Is this company growing?
Or, on the contrary, is it closing in?
Is it going bankrupt?
Please note.
The fact that there is a large inflow of resources from financial activity
is possible.
We do not know the structure yet.
The structure of each of the flows
is possible.
This is a sign that the company has attracted a lot of borrowed resources.
We can assume that it did this to develop its main business.
Please note that the main business in the company is profitable.
It gives a positive flow of money.
The business has prospects,
since it is attracted by borrowed funds.
Please note that according to the article,
investment activity takes place from the flow of resources.
This is not good or bad.
Perhaps this is hidden by the fact that the company,
for example, sells some of its assets
to mobilize additional investment resources.
In this case, the company gets 550 units of investment resources.
In fact, there are no 450.
Once again.
From financial activity, we have an inflow of 500 units.
These are the funds that have come to the company.
According to investment activity, we have a flow of 50 units.
This means that we bought something with this money.
Some equipment.
Perhaps last year,
this company also had a large inflow
through the channels of financial activity.
And this money, perhaps not very large,
but it had.
And this money was used to purchase equipment.
In this case, we see the result of last year's decision.
This is 50 units of money flow,
flow for some investment purposes.
Let's hope that the company develops its business.
Now, please refer to the next slide.
Here you see the formula,
which shows the method of calculating the money flow of money.
The formula is extremely complex.
Its point is to sum up the money flows in each direction.
The resulting figure should be equal to the difference
between the money on the accounts at the beginning of the period and at the end of the period.
If there is an equality, then the calculation is correct.
So, we have dealt with the money flows.
Now, in order to calculate the cost of the investment project,
we must determine the rate of discounting.
Sorry for the tautology.
We will consider three main points.
The first is the alternative rates.
We will consider the VACC model,
the average model of average expenses on capital.
And we will consider the CAPM model,
the model of the value assessment of capital assets.
So,
as for the alternative rates,
when determining the rate of discounting,
we will consider the rate of discounting.
For example, you can take as a rate
the profitability of the stock market index
for a certain period of time, for a year.
You can conduct a survey among shareholders
on what they want to have in their investments.
If you have a responsible investor
and he thinks about what he does with his investments.
These are two options.
Next, you can make a market analysis
and see what similar projects have similar risks
and what rates there are.
Otherwise, if you do not invest in your project,
but in some other,
how much will you get?
For example, the average cost of resources on the market
is 7%, 6%, 7.2%, 6.4%.
You can find an average as an option.
Finally, there may be another option
to determine risk-free profitability
and add a risk premium to it.
This is also an option.
Risk-free profitability or profitability close to it
is considered.
The risk premium can be determined
based on the ratings.
This is also a possible option.
If the company that implements the project
has a rating,
then based on the analogy,
comparing this rating with other companies,
you can determine the risk premium.
Two words about the risk-free interest rate.
As you understand from the name,
under the risk-free rate,
such a financial instrument is understood
by investing in which you do not take any risk.
Obviously, in practice, this is almost unrealistic.
Therefore, such a combination as
the maximum risk-free tool is more common.
To determine the maximum risk-free rate,
you need to find an instrument with the lowest risk.
The measure of risk is the standard deviation.
This is a term from statistics,
and it indicates how much the rating
fluctuates from the average value up and down.
We will not touch on the question of the rate.
We will only note the following.
You use the interest rate for the calculation
of the standard deviation,
and you get the following structure at the output.
For example, the share.
The average return per year is 10%.
The standard deviation is 3%.
What does this mean?
This means that the company that implements the project
has a return of 13% to 7% per year.
The lowest standard deviation,
as practice shows, is due to bonds.
These bonds are certainly more reliable than shares.
Their rate fluctuates from year to year.
The average return per year is 10%.
The bond is used to determine the maximum risk-free rate.
The minimum risk-free rate is 3%.
The standard deviation is 3%.
The return of the bond is 10%.
The maximum risk-free rate is 3%.
Usually, state bonds are used for such calculations.
Their risk is lower than the risk of corporate securities,
corporate bonds, regional and municipal bonds.
If we take countries,
usually American bonds are used as a basis.
In Russia, it can be Russian bonds.
This is one of the bonds that will need to be chosen.
Different bonds have different standard deviations.
I would like to ask you a question.
If a bond with the lowest standard deviation,
that is, with the lowest risk,
has negative profitability,
how can we take negative profitability as a risk-free rate?
You can take this negative value by the module
and use it as a risk-free rate.
Why?
Because we assume that you can trade securities
both on growth and on their fall.
You can earn this profitability,
but with a positive sign.
We have discussed a small set of issues
related to the risk-free rate.
Now we will move on to the next item,
namely, to determine the rate of discounting
based on the VACC model.
Please look at the next slide.
Formula 19.
It shows us that if we take these companies as a basis,
we can calculate how much this company
is covered by the loans it has.
We can even say that all the capital attracted by this company.
Capital consists of two key parts.
This is the debt and the debt-related capital.
This is from shares and bonds.
There may also be long-term credit resources.
We will also consider them.
This formula has weights.
They correspond to the weight of each source of financing
in the capital structure.
This formula has a letter T,
which means corporate tax.
What does this mean?
The fact is that the payments per percent
of bonds are paid from the profit to the tax.
The dividend for the shares is paid after the tax.
Therefore, these two parameters,
the cost of the debt and the cost of long-term credit,
will be incomparable.
It must be brought to a single denominator.
Using this bracket, 1-T,
we try to bring the costs of the debt capital
to the comparable value with the costs of the shares.
Usually, VACC is calculated based on the data of the balance sheet.
It would be difficult to calculate VACC
based on the data of the open market.
Imagine that the company has a share market.
The price of the share will change every second.
Therefore, the weight of the shares and bonds
in the capital structure must change every second.
The company will be tired of recalculating its VACC every time.
To determine this parameter,
which is intended to determine the cost
of the capital,
it is best to use the data of the balance sheet.
Unfortunately, using the data of the balance sheet
does not allow us to take into account the risk factor.
We will talk about this later.
As an example, you can see a small calculation on the slide.
Its purpose is to show that there is a ratio
between the debt and the debt assets.
It is 0.5.
According to mathematics, it is 2 to 1.
That is, two units here, one unit here.
The ratio between them is 0.5.
And if we talk about the debts,
then there are only three debts.
Accordingly, two thirds are divided into one part
and one third into the second part.
Accordingly, we have the cost of the loan
and we know the cost of the assets.
The cost of the loan is 10%.
10% is the cost of the debt that we pay.
29% is the cost of the dividend.
By substituting all this formula,
by substituting the tax rate,
we can determine that the average company expenses
per capita are 21.
The next slide shows us the CAPM model,
the evaluation of the cost of long-term assets.
This model is mainly intended for the evaluation of the stock.
It has a very interesting fate.
The fact is that in an attempt to find
the most diversified portfolio,
foreign scientists came across an interesting fact.
The more paper you combine into a portfolio,
the less risk you have of a portfolio
expressed by a standard deviation.
If you look at the graph,
in this case, you see that the risk of the stock is on one axis.
Horizontally, the number of valuable papers included in the portfolio is delayed.
At the moment when there is only one paper in the portfolio,
the risk of this portfolio is maximum.
When two papers are combined, the risk is slightly reduced.
When three papers are combined, the risk is slightly reduced.
When ten papers are combined, the risk is slightly reduced.
But what is interesting is that from some point on,
depending on the market,
the risk of the portfolio stops falling.
This is a very interesting discovery,
which has led to the better understanding of the nature of the risk of valuable papers.
It turns out that the risk consists of two parts.
The first part is the so-called systemic risk,
the risk from which it is impossible to get rid of any diversification.
Whatever you do, if you buy a stock,
you bear this risk anyway.
And for this, by the way, you get a reward.
Because the second part of the risk is related to the issuer itself.
So the second part of the risk can be eliminated.
If it can be eliminated, then the market does not pay you for such a risk.
If you take both risks, this is your problem.
This is what the market thinks.
According to experts, it is quite fair.
So, a little conclusion.
If you want to invest, if you buy one valuable paper,
you take two risks.
One is paid for by the market,
and the second is not paid by anyone.
You take an unpaid, unnecessary risk.
Therefore, in any case, you need to build a portfolio
and try to avoid unnecessary risk.
In general, this is a recommendation.
Now, based on this fact,
that the risk is made up of two parts,
a model was built,
we omit the mathematical justification,
which is called CAPM.
This is Formula 21.
The meaning of this model is that
there is a direct dependence
between the profitability of the paper
and the average profitability of the market.
If the profitability of the market changes,
then the profitability of your paper should change.
To express this as fully as possible,
a special coefficient was introduced.
In fact, it is close to the parameter of standard deviation.
At least the formulas are mathematically similar.
You have a formula for calculating the beta coefficient in the conspect.
You can familiarize yourself with it.
Now, pay attention to the slide again.
The beta coefficient, which is presented in this formula,
has a fairly simple meaning.
Imagine that your company has a beta coefficient
and the beta coefficient is 2.
This means that every time the profitability of the market changes by 1%,
the profitability of your paper will change by 2%.
If the beta coefficient is 3,
this means that every time the profitability of the market changes by 1%,
the profitability of your paper changes by 3%.
Or it should change.
So, if the beta coefficient is negative 1, what does it mean?
This means that for every unit of the market fall,
your paper should grow by 1 unit.
If your coefficient is 0.5,
this means that for every coefficient of the market growth,
your paper grows by only 0.5%.
This is a very good coefficient that allows you to choose papers
in order to build a certain kind of portfolio.
Aggressive, defensive, or some other.
So, you can look at a small example,
here on the slide,
which is intended for calculating profitability according to the CAPM model.
If, for example, we have a risk-free profitability of 6%,
the profitability of the market is 12%,
the beta coefficient of our share is 1.5,
I remind you what 1.5 means.
This means that for every percent of the market growth,
the profitability of the share should grow by 1.5%.
We calculate the profitability according to the CAPM model.
So, it turns out that the profitability of our paper should be 15%.
We have considered several options for determining the discount rate,
and before that, we have analyzed the questions related to determining the money flows.
In each case, you need to conduct a separate study
and try to justify the choice of one or another discount rate as logically as possible.
There are no universal rules for determining the discount rate.
After making a choice, after analyzing the market,
you have to choose the discount rate that is the most correct for you.
Now let's move on to the next topic.
We will now deal with the adoption of investment decisions.